# Background

## From Myles Boylan (NSF program officer):

The program description is purposefully very brief, because the intent
is to impose virtually no constraints on what be proposed.  We are
hoping that this maximum flexibility in addressing the goal of this
program (improved STEM education) will lead to some great project
proposals that did not fit under the predecessor programs.  However,
we are still willing to support projects that did fit under the three
sunsetted programs, STEP, TUES, and WIDER.

Here are some more details:

Budget: There are absolutely no budget restrictions beyond the Grant
Proposal Guide.  You can include equipment that would be needed for
the performance of the project as long as it is specialized, not
standard items that an institution should supply its instructional
faculty.
 
Duration: No more than 5 years.  This is an NSF wide restriction.
 
Programmatic Elements with regard to STEP like proposals: There is a
lack of mention of recruitment (in contrast to retention).  However,
recruitment work is still possible although I would be very careful
about the kinds of activities you put in a proposal.  Basic things
like brochures, high school recruiting visits, and web sites are not
typically effective nor interesting to us.  More substantive activity
involving the instructional faculty such as working with HS faculty
and creating opportunities for early college credit would be more
appealing to investigate.  Retention remains important because most
institutions have pretty good data on the WDF rate for gatekeeper
courses.  So they know the size of the challenge they face.
 
Research Focus: The IUSE description has a greater research focus.
However, we are still interesting in supporting implementation work.
For example, we are committed to implementation efforts at scale and
we see this as ripe ground for research.  The new NSF/ US Dept of Ed
"Common Guidelines for Education R&D" (August, 2013) would be useful
to consider for guiding research projects.  But careful evaluation
data also is useful to us and IUSE is NOT only for education research.
 
We have a large sum available for new projects, equal to the sum of
the budgets of the 3 sunsetted programs.  I cannot predict number of
awards because there are no budget guidelines.  I would expect that
the funding rate would be in the neighborhood of 20%.

## Other Material

Check out
[The Computational Science for Undergraduate Research Experiences (CSURE) Program](https://www.nics.tennessee.edu/CSURE-2014)
funded by NSF:
this program has a different focus than what Software Carpentry
bootcamps might. But this will not be evident on a first-impression
basis to the reviewers/ panel, and so it's a good idea to address in
the proposal.
